# Variovorax_phage_resistance_increases_density_2024

Repository for the empirical data related to the manuscript "Bacteriophage resistance increases bacterial productivity by shifting population growth dynamics in a soil bacterium Variovorax sp." 

# Abstract

Bacteriophages can be important drivers of bacterial densities, and therefore microbial community composition and function. In response to phage infection, bacteria can evolve resistance while phage reciprocally evolve to increase infectivity. Coevolutionary arms-races between bacteria and phage have been studied in many model systems and in pairs isolated from natural samples. However, how multiple bacteria-phage pairs coevolve simultaneously within a community is poorly understood. Here, we examine how three pairs of coexisting soil bacteria (Ochrobactrum sp., Pseudomonas sp., and Variovorax sp.) evolve with three species-specific bacteriophages over eight weeks of experimental evolution. Surprisingly, we did not find long-term coevolution with two phages going extinct after two weeks and Ochrobactrum phage increasing in infectivity without reciprocal increases in bacterial resistance (asymmetrical coevolution). One surprising finding was that Variovorax sp. increased in density following phage extinction, above that of no-phage controls. We examined the mechanisms behind this density increase through common garden experiments, sequencing, growth curves, and supernatant assays. That resistance to lytic phage can improve host densities has implications for wider ecology and phage therapy where lytic phages are presumed to have negative effects on their hosts.
